Fail2Ban on CentOS 7
====================

Fail2ban is an intrusion prevention software for servers that tries to detect
and prevent brute-force attacks by banning clients from all access after a
certain event like a specific number of failed login attempts. It is not
limited to a specific network daemon, but commonly used for services like SSH
or mail servers.

This is a short guide on how to install and configure fail2ban on CentOS 7. It
should also apply to RHEL and Scientific Linux 7.


Install fail2ban from EPEL repo
-------------------------------

Fail2ban is packaged in the [Extra Packages for Enterprise Linux (EPEL)
Repository](https://fedoraproject.org/wiki/EPEL) provided by the Fedora
community. EPEL is one of the few (possibly the only) repository I would
recommend to use as extrra repository for CentOS 7 and we do not want to
install fail2ban manually. Hence we install/activate the repository and install
the fail2ban package:

    yum install epel-release
    yum install fail2ban


Configure fail2ban
------------------

All options are in the file `/etc/fail2ban/jail.conf`. However, it is not
recommended to modify this file–it may be overwritten by system updates–but to
create either a `jail.local` in the same directory or separate files under
the `jails.d` directory.

For now, let us use `jails.local`:

    vim -p /etc/fail2ban/jail.conf /etc/fail2ban/jail.local

Go through the options in `jail.conf` and copy over to `jail.local` what you
want to modify. For example, a `jail.local` could look like this:

    [DEFAULT]

    # Ignore localhost as well as my own ip
    ignoreip = 127.0.0.1/8 111.222.111.222

    # Increase bantime to 20min
    bantime  = 1200

    # Decrease retries to 3
    maxretry = 3

    # Enable sshd protection
    [sshd]
    enabled = true

Then start fail2ban and make sure it is started automatically:

    systemctl enable fail2ban
    systemctl start fail2ban

Now test it using a PC you did not exclude before. Try logging in, use an
incorrect password multiple times, … You should be banned for 20min now.

You can check banned IPs with

    ipset list


SELinux Rules
-------------

An up-to-date CentOS 7 should include the necessary SELinux rules for the
fail2ban configuration used the this article by default. Nevertheless, it might
be necessary to create your own rules based on the configuration or your
operating system. Here is, how to generate a set of rules:

First, temporariy set SELinux to permissive mode to get some data we will later
use to generate a policy rule.

    setenforce 0

This should ensure SELinux is not blocking fail2ban at all. What it will do,
however, is log everything it would block. From these logs we can then create
the policy. To get a comprehensive list of everything that fail2ban need to be
doing, make sure to use it: Start it up, test it so an IP gets blocked, …

Now that we have done this, we need to get the rules from the `audit.log` and
generate a policy:

    grep fail2ban /var/log/audit/audit.log | \
      audit2allow -M fail2ban-syslog

Enable this pilicy:

    semodule -i fail2ban-syslog.pp

Finally, change SELinux back to be enforcing:

    setenforce 1


<time>Sat Jan  9 17:44:14 CET 2016</time>
